Flow: add loki.process component (#2589)
grafana/agent: docs/sources/flow/reference/components/loki.process.md

---
aliases:
- /docs/agent/latest/flow/reference/components/loki.process
title: loki.process
---

# loki.process

`loki.process` receives log entries from other loki components, applies one or
more processing _stages_, and forwards the results to the list of receivers

> in the component's arguments.

Reviewer: Italicizing stages here seems a bit weird to me, since you don't really follow up on the specific word "stages." Do we want to explicitly define stage in the next paragraph, saying "A stage is a ..."?

The `loki.process` component is a multi-purpose tool that can parse, transform,

> and filter log entries before they're passed to a downstream component. The

Reviewer: This feels like a second intro paragraph to the component, can this be reworded?

  forward_to = RECEIVER_LIST

  stage {
    ...
  }
  ...
}
```

## Arguments

`loki.process` supports the following arguments:

Name              | Type                 | Description                                      | Default | Required
----------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ------- | --------
`forward_to`      | `list(LogsReceiver)` | Where to forward log entries after processing. | | yes

## Blocks

The following blocks are supported inside the definition of `loki.process`:

Hierarchy    | Block | Description | Required
---------    | ----- | ----------- | --------
stage        | [stage][] | Processing stage to run. | no
stage > json | [json][]  | Configures a JSON processing stage.  | no

The `>` symbol indicates deeper levels of nesting. For example, `stage > json`
refers to a `json` block defined inside of a `stage` block.

[stage]: #stage-block
[json]: #json-block

### stage block

The `stage` block describes a single processing step to run log entries
through. As such, each block must have exactly _one_ inner block or argument,
to match the type of stage to configure. Multiple processing stages must be

> defined in different blocks.

Reviewer: Can you you explain that stages are applied top-down in the order defined by the user?

configuration.

## Debug information

`loki.process` does not expose any component-specific debug
information.

## Debug metrics
* `loki_process_dropped_lines_total` (counter): Number of lines dropped as part of a processing stage.

## Example

This example creates a `loki.process` component that extracts the `environment`
value from a JSON log line and sets it as a label.
```river
loki.process "local" {
  forward_to = [loki.write.onprem.receiver]

  stage {
    json {
      expressions = { "extracted_env" = "environment" }
    }
  }

  stage {
    labels = { "env" = "extracted_env" }
  }
}
```

## JSON stage
When configuring a JSON stage, the `source` field defines the source of data to
parse as JSON. By default, this is the log line itself, but it can also be a
previously extracted value.

The `expressions` field is the set of key-value pairs of MESPath expressions to
run. The map key defines the name with which the data is extracted as, while
the map value is the expression used to populate the value.

<!-- TODO(@tpaschalis) Should we move this example here to a different tutorial?
I don't feel the fields are enough for someone to understand what the processing

> stage is doing -->

Reviewer: Yeah, I think examples should be more copy-and-paste focused rather than explaining details. I think explanations belong either closer to where the thing is originally defined (i.e., in the "json block" header) or in a tutorial where we can dive deeper.

Author: Okay, I'll move them back to each subblock definition, hope it doesn't make them too verbose.

Here's a given log line and two JSON stages to run.

```river
{"log":"log message\n","extra":"{\"user\":\"agent\"}"}

stage { json {
  expressions = { output = log, extra = "" }
}
stage { json {
  source      = "extra"
  expressions = { username = "user" }

> }

Reviewer: Can you give this example as a component rather than the body of the component? Also, please format it as riverfmt would :)

---
aliases:
- /docs/agent/latest/flow/reference/components/loki.process
title: loki.process
---

# loki.process

`loki.process` receives log entries from other loki components, applies one or
more processing _stages_, and forwards the results to the list of receivers
in the component's arguments.

A stage is a multi-purpose tool that can parse, transform, and filter log
entries before they're passed to a downstream component. These stages are
applied to each log entry in order of their appearance in the configuration

> file. All stages within a `loki.process` block have access to the log entry's
> label set, the log line, the log timestamp, as well as a shared map of
> 'extracted' values; this allows results of one stage to be used in a subsequent
> one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
file. All stages within a `loki.process` block have access to the log entry's
label set, the log line, the log timestamp, as well as a shared map of
'extracted' values, so the results of one stage to be used in a subsequent
one.
```

Multiple `loki.process` components can be specified by giving them
different labels.

## Usage

```river
loki.process "LABEL" {
  forward_to = RECEIVER_LIST

  stage {
    ...
  }
  ...
}
```

## Arguments

`loki.process` supports the following arguments:

Name              | Type                 | Description                                      | Default | Required
----------------- | -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ------- | --------
`forward_to`      | `list(LogsReceiver)` | Where to forward log entries after processing. | | yes

## Blocks

The following blocks are supported inside the definition of `loki.process`:

Hierarchy      | Block      | Description | Required
-------------- | ---------- | ----------- | --------
stage          | [stage][]  | Processing stage to run. | no
stage > json   | [json][]   | Configures a JSON processing stage.  | no

> stage > labels | [labels][] | Configures a Labels processing stage. | no

Reviewer 2: I think "Labels" should be lowercase here.

Author: Ok, keeping this in mind as a convention for the stages that we'll gradually add as well.

The `>` symbol indicates deeper levels of nesting. For example, `stage > json`
refers to a `json` block defined inside of a `stage` block.

[stage]: #stage-block
[json]: #json-block
[labels]: #labels-block

### stage block

The `stage` block describes a single processing step to run log entries
through. As such, each block must have exactly _one_ inner block to match the
type of stage to configure. Multiple processing stages must be defined in
different blocks and are applied on the incoming log entries in top-down order.

> The block does not support any arguments and is configured only via inner
> blocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `stage` block does not support any arguments and is configured only via inner
blocks.
```

### json block

The `json` inner block configures a JSON processing stage that parses incoming
log lines or previously extracted values as JSON and uses
[JMESPath expressions](https://jmespath.org/tutorial.html) to extract new
values from them.

Name             | Type          | Description | Default | Required
---------------- | ------------- | ----------- | ------- | --------
`expressions`    | `map(string)` | Key-value pairs of JMESPath expressions. | | yes
`source`         | `string`      | Source of the data to parse as JSON. | `""` | no
`drop_malformed` | `bool`        | Drop lines whose input cannot be parsed as valid JSON.| `false` | no

When configuring a JSON stage, the `source` field defines the source of data to
parse as JSON. By default, this is the log line itself, but it can also be a
previously extracted value.

> The `expressions` field is the set of key-value pairs of MESPath expressions to
> run. The map key defines the name with which the data is extracted as, while
> the map value is the expression used to populate the value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `expressions` field is the set of key-value pairs of MESPath expressions to
run. The map key defines the name with which the data is extracted, while
the map value is the expression used to populate the value.
```

Here's a given log line and two JSON stages to run.

```river
{"log":"log message\n","extra":"{\"user\":\"agent\"}"}

loki.process "username" {
	stage {
		json {
			expressions = {output = log, extra = ""}
		}
	}

	stage {
		json {
			source      = "extra"
			expressions = {username = "user"}
		}
	}
}
```

In this example, the first stage uses the log line as the source and populates
these values in the shared map. An empty expression means using the same value
as the key (so `extra="extra"`).
```
output: log message\n
extra: {"user": "agent"}
```

The second stage uses the value in `extra` as the input and appends the
following key-value pair to the set of extracted data.
```
username: agent
```

### labels block

> The `labels` inner block configures a Labels processing stage that can read
> data from the extracted values map and set new labels on incoming log entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `labels` inner block configures a labels processing stage that can read
data from the extracted values map and set new labels on incoming log entries.
```

Name                  | Type          | Description                               | Default        | Required
--------------------- | --------------| ----------------------------------------- | -------------- | --------
`labels`              | `map(string)` | Configures a `labels` processing stage.   | `{}`           | no

> In a Labels stage, the map's keys define the label to set and the values are
> how to look them up.  If the value is empty, it is inferred to be the same as
> the key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a labels stage, the map's keys define the label to set and the values are
how to look them up.  If the value is empty, it is inferred to be the same as
the key.
```
